---
title: "Setting up a new personal website"
excerpt: For a few years now I have had my own domain name but never really done much with it. During the recent COVID lockdown I decided it was time to fix that.
featured-image: /images/2020/10/website.png
date: 2020-10-14
permalink: /posts/2020/10/website/
tags:
  - software development 
---

For a few years now I have had my own domain name. I wasn't really sure what to do with it and so left it empty. Recently I decided it was time to do something about it.

## Getting started
My first challenge was to figure out what I wanted to do:

### My motivation
- I wanted to reduce the number of platforms I use - LinkedIn, medium, Zenodo, GitHub, ... - or at least, get a little more control over where my content lived.
- I wanted to see if there were ways to generate a bit of a network effect between content.

### Constraints
There were some constraints, too:

- Minimal technical overhead. This ruled out self hosting a server through AWS or deploying via services like netlify or Heroku. It also ruled out deploying Wordpress, which I've used for other sites like [www.windfors.de](http://www.windfors.de) and a couple of hobby sites.
- Functioning framework out of the box. I didn't want to spend hours or days getting everything set up. This ruled out Django.
- Something new. I wanted to learn how the technology I would be using, works.
- Text-based interface, not a page-builder. Again, this rules out Wordpress.
- Need for version control. This meant content had to be captured at GitHub. 
- Cheap. I wanted to avoid hosting charges if possible. 

### Why?
And what did I think people would be using the website for?

This was the hardest! I think these days a personal website is a combination shop front, photo album, and scrap book that allows deeper engagement than something like LinkedIn. I figured people would use my site if they wanted to know my thoughts on something.

All of this helped me understand why I was putting together another website:
- Desire to share mostly written content, usually educational or informative and professional, but also sometimes a bit more personal. 

So, I decided to start a blog. There's no need to reinvent the wheel.

## Choosing GitHub Pages
The above requirements pushed me pretty quickly to serving content through [GitHub pages](https://pages.github.com/). 

Github pages can serve simple HTML pages directly and also allows custom URLs, which is ideal for my purposes. But, if you have more that one page of content, its unrealistic to write HTML directly, and most content management systems need a database. 

Fortunately GitHub also support blogging with Jekyll. Jekyll converts markdown or HTML data into themed pages, and can be styled to give something a little more personalised. There's also good support available online. Perfect!

## Building a Jekyll Website
Just follow the instructions on [GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/working-with-github-pages/setting-up-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll) to set up a repository and get Jekyll working.

The next step is to install the framework. This website is based on [AcademicPages](https://github.com/academicpages/academicpages.github.io) with a few small changes. The instructions there are easy to follow, and you can find much more extensive help and workflows on the 'net.

### Changes 
For what it's worth, here's a list of changes I've made to the _academic pages_ template.
- Using Google fonts
- Only using the blog pages
- Off-white background
- Slightly more content in the "about" page, which is also the landing page
- A splash of colour.

Quite honestly though, the [AcademicPages](https://github.com/academicpages/academicpages.github.io) theme would have been fine out-of-the-box for a typical academic user.

{% include image.html image-url="/images/2020/10/website.png" shadow=true caption='It works!' alt="screenshot of my website" %}

## Using a custom domain
I'm using a domain name (andyclifton.me) that I purchased from one of the big hosting providers. This points to the Github repository where my website is hosted. [Github has very comprehensive instructions about how to set this up](https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/working-with-github-pages/configuring-a-custom-domain-for-your-github-pages-site).

## Deployment
Deploying this website is really easy. It's all handled through Github. It builds in about 10 seconds after a commit.

There's no build process on Heroku, no linking to AWS buckets to allow storage, nothing complex at all. This means less things to go wrong!

If I wanted to, I could also deploy this site through netlify (which would also deal with the build process), or even just dump the HTML files in __site_ into an AWS bucket and serve them from there.

## Lessons Learned
Setting up a personal website using github pages and Jekyll is pretty simple. There are a ton of [good themes out there](https://jekyllrb.com/resources/) that you could use directly, or you could just take one that is close and adapt it pretty quickly using SASS/CSS, page templates (stored in __layouts_), and content blocks (stored in __includes_). Because there's no database involved its really easy to develop locally and deploy without worrying too much about the build process.

The hardest bit for me was deciding on the core material on the site and getting it working well enough that I felt ready to go live; call that an MVP if you will. All of the other ideas have gone in to my backlog instead.

[Give it a try!](https://pages.github.com/)
