---
title: 'Home office in Stuttgart'
date: 2020-03-14
permalink: /posts/2020/03/lockdown/
tags:
  - COVID-19
  - Home office
  - Productivity
---

On the afternoon of Friday 13th March, [Stuttgart closed bars and museums, banned large events](https://static.kultus-bw.de/corona.html), and announced schools would close on Tuesday, all with the goal of limiting COVID-19 transmission. We’re out of toilet paper in stores, and public transport is empty. Yup, we’re finally going into [social distancing](https://www.theatlantic.com/family/archive/2020/03/coronavirus-what-does-social-distancing-mean/607927/).

In this post I want to write down what’s lead us here, and what it means for us. My experiences have probably not been different to anyone else’s, but I thought it might help others to know that they are not alone!

_No, it’s not "Hamsterkauf" (literally, "hamster buying", or what the Germans call hoarding). This is about what our supply cupboard usually contains._

## Background

I work in a 25-person teaching & research team at Stuttgart University in southern Germany. The details don’t matter.

It’s an international team, and we’re used to working on projects that span many countries and organisations.

We’ve gone through a pretty rapid shift to home office. Even at the end of February we were still holding largish events, and planning new ones for March and April. And now, we’re watching shops and schools closing.

## Preparation

Anyone who read the news and understands exponential processes knew something was coming. But exponential growth is crazy. People don’t get it. We just can’t.

I guess our employer has business continuity plans, but they were not communicated to us in detail. I don’t know what I expected, but I would have hoped for more communication, earlier.

[There are strong cultural preferences for academic independence in Germany.](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universit%C3%A4t_im_Nationalsozialismus) The university’s institutes are functionally and financially separate. This plays out in several ways.

The choice of when to allow home office was left with the institute leadership, who are very good engineers and scientists, but not epidemiologists…

The Institutes have very devolved IT systems. We have relatively few corporate-level or off-the-shelf solutions, and have probably missed a chance or too to use the Uni’s purchasing power and modernise. That’s another post!

We discussed the potential implications of Coronavirus in a group meeting at the end of February. We didn’t plan beyond assuming we would switch to home office, probably at short notice. We didn’t trial anything, or think through all of our activities.

In hindsight, we should have checked a few things and spent some money to get everyone ready (see below).

_You can’t get these anymore in my local supermarket! Photo by [Kelly
Sikkema](https://unsplash.com/@kellysikkema?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/sickness?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)_

## Making the decision

On Wednesday 11th, the university was allowing people to switch to home office if needed.

On Friday 13th, the regional government announced they would close schools. That made office presence untenable for many, and so we took the decision to switch immediately to home office.

Most of us had been expecting it anyway, and so screens and laptops were ferried home by the few folks with cars.

## Managing the transition

Communications are key as you carry out a transition. It doesn’t matter if that’s because of a corporate restructuring, your office flooding, or COVID-19. We don’t know what to expect, but communications will help deal with it.

1.  We’re trying really hard to keep up **informative communications**.
1.  We’ve been using **slack** for more than a year, and everyone in the team’s on it. Our internal email traffic is almost exclusively calendar invitations at this point. We’re upgrading to a paid slack plan so that we can use screen sharing and have the various sub-teams meet up in video conferences.
1.  We’ve got a **#covid-19 channel** to share news that is relevant to us. We know people are monitoring other news sources, so on our internal slack we focus on making our COVID communications relevant to our work.
1.  We’re trying to **keep the rest of slack an infection-free zone**. Otherwise it just turns into distracting noise.
1.  **We’re using phones too**, but not many of us have corporate cell phones and calling personal cell phones for work is at least taboo (and possibly illegal) in Germany. Depending on slack, we might need to look at getting people on to corporate plans.
1.  We’re [using the German DFN conference system](https://www.conf.dfn.de/) for **video calls with lots of people** or people outside our organisation. This won’t work for everyone (you have to be a German academic!), but it’s helpful to have a simple external tool for larger events to keep clear internal / external divisions. [^1]

We’ve looked at other communications tools, but we know how slack works and are experienced with it. Changing / adding solutions (and potentially confusing staff) at this point really wouldn’t help.

_No more bumping in to people at the coffee machine. Photo by [Kelly
Sikkema](https://unsplash.com/@kellysikkema?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/home-office?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)._

## How we expect to work

We don’t do things one way. Usually each new colleague brings new ideas and we adapt to each project and task as we go. That’s what you get from being educators, not a more monolithic business.

But, this also means we have a lot of skills in the group and we can probably adapt quickly to new challenges. The #general channel in slack is a good place to find out who knows what, and we’ve always **documented shared / new knowledge on our wiki**.

Most of us **took our laptops, keyboards, monitors, etc. home** on Friday. That means those people have secure access to network drives. No corporate device means no access. We have legal obligations to safeguard our data that might make it impossible to grant people access without a corporate device. It’s not clear what this might mean for those stranded at home without laptops.

We’re already using **Github and Gitlab** for code and issues. This helps keep people on the same page and on track. If we were doing sales it would probably have been time to go to hubspot or similar.

We have a couple of **regular appointments each week anyway** — team meetings, mainly — which we’re going to take virtual. Lots of companies do this, and we’ll be stealing ideas from them. We’ll see how that works.

_This is a nice set up. My corner of the spare bedroom looks nothing like this!
Photo by [Nicole
Wolf](https://unsplash.com/@joeel56?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/desk?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)_

## What it means for me at home

I’m used to doing home office for up to a couple of weeks at a time. So, I’m planning on approaching this the same way as usual.

I know what my long-term goals are. I’ll break those down into things to do over a month or so, and then figure out the actual tasks that go with them. Those tasks go on Trello (or post-its) in a basic ideas / to-do / doing / done kanban board, I do them, and tick them off when they’re done.

I have a desk in the spare room in my apartment, so I don’t have to work where I sleep or relax. I can take a break when I need to.

I have a yoga mat on the floor, and I get in 20–30 minutes a day, doing whatever I find on youtube. I use it to break up the day. I’m making sure to keep my core in shape, if you must know.

Honestly, I’m expecting to get bored and I’ll probably miss my colleagues.

## Stuff we should have done a month ago

For those who still have time to prepare, a few things are already clear:

1.  **Discuss your plans early**, and get feedback to find out what you might do wrong before it’s too late. Exponential growth is scary. This is going to happen faster than you think.
1.  **Get everyone a computer that they can use at home**. Staff without a corporate device at home can’t work effectively because they can’t access the network. It doesn’t need to be a whizzy one, but remember that a few hundred euros / dollars more now could let you extend it’s operating lifetime. And even a slow computer is better than none.
1.  **Get them an extra screen or two**. This is a big productivity factor.
1.  **Don’t forget a webcam**. Screen-integrated or not, just make sure they have a webcam.
1.  **Get over the cost**. Yes, it’s going to cost you. But 2,000 GBP or USD or thereabouts for each worker is much less than the lost productivity, or the cost of recruiting a replacement.
1.  **Try virtual meetings**. Like many organisations we struggle sometimes to have [effective internal meetings](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-02295-z) in person, and we should have tried a virtual meeting before it really mattered. I think agendas & clarity on the whats and whys of meetings will become even more important.

_Buy folks laptops and phones! Photo by
[Headway](https://unsplash.com/@headwayio?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/virtual-meeting?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)_

## Stuff we should have done years ago
This is obvious in hindsight, but like almost everyone we've needed to go through this to understand how bad some things were.

- **We should have had a plan**. Oh, this to the nth power.
- **We should have fixed our challenges with effective meetings**. This. This!
- **We should have gone digital when we had the time**. The University runs on paper and signatures and rubber stamps. I reckon some of the forms haven’t changed since they renamed the Uni in 1967. This is great until you try moving paper around an organisation that is now working from home. I expect that when the dust settles we’ll be going digital. That’s assuming that circumstances don’t force us to do this immediately.[^2]

## So far, so good

For all of the challenges above, we’re doing OK. We’ve got this far. We’ve got almost everyone safely home, and we’ll figure out the rest.

Like any organisation, this crisis — so far, relatively mild — has shone a bright light into our processes, and some things are clearly visible. We’ll no doubt find more over the next few days, weeks, and months, and I’ll share what I can.

Wash your hands!

[^1]: The DFN conference solution survived about 2 days before crashing under the load. We switched to Zoom and after a few weeks the uni set up a campus-wide webex contract. I still use Zoom for a lot of meetings, particularly with large numbers of people.
[^2]: Update from September 2020: we're now just printing, signing, then scanning, and emailing paperwork around. Much better!